Alright, we're here, took us a little
while, but we're here at composition API.
And it's time to talk about the brand
new thing that is with view three.
The first thing I want to caveat when it
comes to the composition API is that even
though it was introduced in view three,
there actually are ways
to use it on view two.
So that is one of the things that the team
has tried to work really hard on is
that,even though there are certain
performance optimizations and
sort of like type Script enhancements
that have come with view three.
As a whole, when it comes to feature
parity, the team has actually worked
really hard to try to keep it as
basically cross compatible as humanly.
Be possible because they know, a lot
of times people when they're working on
enterprise apps, as much as developers
would love to be on the cutting edge tool
,the reality is that most of time
there's just no time to do that.
And so rather than have developers be
kind of feeling left out of the fact
that they might want to rewrite their
components using composition API.
We basically have plugins that allow
you to plug in the composition API
interview too.
So again, while this is a view three
feature, just know that you can use this
in view two,
you just need to look into the plugin.
All right, so, composition API,
let's talk about it.
So remember this lifecycle,
diagram that we talked about earlier?
Up here, you'll notice in blue,
there's a very special lifecycle hook.
That's called setup.
And so setup has a very special
meaning for us in view because why?
Anytime you basically see the setup
keyword, the lifecycle hook,
you're basically ensured that
you're using composition API.
I think that's one reason why the diagram
here actually has it in parentheses.
This is because as we can see here,
prior to the setup function,
there is nothing else.
So this is what's interesting with the
composition API is that it happens before
the options API.
So what does that really mean?
So we take a look at our code.
I'm not hoping into the playground,
so that we can just kind of code some
stuff without messing up Scylla view,
go into the playground.
And then NPM run Dev.
Boom, okay, we have a Pokedex ACC app and
it's running.
Alright, so let's go ahead and
see what is going on here.
For whatever reason, it did not open it.
The actual folder,there we go.
Okay, so close this,close this,
we're in playground right now.
If we take a look at our app dot view,
you'll notice here that we're running
a fetch and we're doing all
this stuff inside of created.
Now, I mentioned that the set of function
actually happens before and knit.
So actually if you think
about asynchronous,
they really should be run in the setup
function, because that's its earliest
point of starting sort of
like the component lifecycle.
So how that might look is that we,
actually would have a setup
function that's up here at the top.
And the reason I think it's important
to organize your code this way and
putting set up at the top is because
everything else below does not exist.
And it's useful to kind of think of it
this way Is that this is what I'm doing
inside of here.
Now the thing that makes the composition
API particularly unique when it comes to
view is that everything inside of
here is truly vanilla JavaScript.
So in other words there's,
we can't just go like data, function,
return, Pokedex like all this stuff
is gone because why,composition
API is about I guess some call
it freedom and flexibility.
One of the advantages
of options API is that,
it provides a very consistent way for
you to add stuff.
Here's where my data goes,
here's where my methods go,
here's where my computer properties go.
But over time, as people have scaled
their applications and components,
there are times where people found that
they wanted to actually group things
according to their concerns.
And maybe find ways to organize
their codes in different ways.
The composition API lets you do that.
But what that means though,
is that it's a free for
all in that you have to
organize everything yourself.
So in the instance of setup,
let's have a reactive named variable,
in this case for the region of
Pokemon that this is tracking.
So the first thing is to remember
this is vanilla JavaScript so
we actually have to declare
the variables manually now.
So, const,
region name equals kanto, great.
Now here's the thing though,
when we actually look at this.
So, let's look inside the Dev tools,
and look at our app.
We'll see here that nothing exist right
now, only the Pokedex is showing up.
And the reason for that is because
once you're inside of setup view,
is not doing any magic for you,
you have to actually start being very
explicit about what's happening.
So the thing about the composition
API is that inside of here,
view is not doing any magic for you.
So unlike when we're inside the data and
methods where you can just call this
context and it knows to like this.
That Pokedex knows to go inside of
data to go get the Pokedex, like,
inside of here, everything is like, okay,
you want the freedom here's freedom.
And so what does that mean?
That means that at the end of setup,
we actually have to manually
return anything we want to expose.
And at first, that might sound
a little bit redundant, right?
You're like, wait,
why would I want to do that?
Well, because what you'll see now inside
the Dev tools is that, check it out,
the region name is appearing.
And the reason for that is because when
you're writing the JavaScript up here,
you probably don't want everything
being exposed to your component.
There are times certain things might be
called private, and there are things where
you're running calculations that
aren't relevant to the template and
to the rest of the component.
And so that you can keep all up here.
And what you're doing here
is that you're returning it.
And so when you return it now it's
actually something that you can
actually access.
So let's say inside of this created
method, now it can be like log,
this dot region name.
And so we'll see now inside of here,
there you go.
The created lifecycle hook now has
access to the data that we set up
inside of setup.
Didn't mean to do that, but
that's how it worked out, okay.
So the question here is,
I want the ability to run an async
function at this point, right?
And so your first instinct might be like,
well, okay, this makes sense.
What we're gonna do here
is we're gonna create a,
Const of Pokedex, and we'll just
copy over this await function and
then we'll just make sure that setup
is async because this isn't a await.
And then we'll return the Pokedex here and
let's keep that actually alphabetical.
And then since we're returning it anyways,
you don't need to define the data twice,
so there we go.
And then we actually don't even
need this method anymore, right?
Cause we've just refactored it.
And then,
we're running this inside of here.
So actually now that I think about it,
we could just say, we just
need to delete this and then ideally we
could then just say this dot Pokedex.
So we just see the region name and
the Pokedex show up but
you're gonna see view yelling
at you in a pretty big way.
And I wanted to show this error because
most of the time this is not gonna be
something you run into but
especially when you're getting started and
you see this error it's probably
gonna be a bit confusing.
Because you're gonna look at this and
if we read it,
it says that set a function
returned a promise, but
no suspense boundary has been defined and
that's a lot of words, right?
You're like what the heck is going on?
Well, so just to let what is suspense?
So we look inside of the docks.
Suspense is another built in component
that is experimental currently with view.
And the idea behind this is that,
it's trying to help us better offload
performance when it comes
to asynchronous option.
So in the sense of like when you're
loading something asynchronously,
you can have a fallback.
So the way that code works as you can
see here, is that you can see here,
so you would drop in
your suspense component.
And okay, this is my dashboard that I'm
loading a bunch of async stuff happening,
but in case that fails, or frankly,
it's not ready for me yet,
I'm gonna go ahead and
fall back to this template.
This syntax should look familiar to you,
because earlier, we talked about slots.
And so here's that V slot fallback.
And this is already defined
on the suspense component.
And so what you'll end up seeing on
the pages you'll see loading first, and
whenever it's ready,
view will automatically switch
it over to the dashboard.
And so this is actually really useful.
But the key thing here though, to
understand though especially at this point
in the recording,
is that it is experimental.
So this is why at this moment we're
not gonna go into depth regarding
how to use it and that kind of thing.
Keep an eye on the dock if you wanna play
around with it, but know that this will
probably be a pretty key part of a lot
of framework approaches going forward.
As a lot of frameworks are trying to
figure out better ways of server-side
rendering different things, and how to
improve performance when it comes to
loading JavaScript on a page and so forth.
Now, when it comes to our error though,
the reason this is a problem at this
particular point in time is because if
we think about it from the tree itself,
the app dot view is the root
component of everything.
So you can really suspend your root
component in a state of nothingness,
that does not work.
And so what you actually have to do is
that, in the case that you really do need
to do asynchronous operations
in composition API.
This is where you need to
put it into a component,
because the app dot view basically
needs to be in a stable state.
That's like, Okay,
I know where everything is and
then this component over here
is going to do some stuff.
I'm gonna hang on to it and
give it a backup.
And then I can do other stuff over here.
But we spend app dot view the whole thing,
basically, because of how asynchronous
operations work, it just runs
the risk of corrupting it right?
So this is why we don't run async
setup at the root level at app View.
So to show how this works then is,
we're gonna go ahead and
create a component called Pokedex.
And this is where we're gonna go ahead and
then we'll have our script tag and
we'll have our template,
if it would auto complete sometime
Emette is uncooperative with me.
Okay, great.
So let's go ahead and blow this up into
two columns, so that's easier to follow.
We'll go ahead and bring over this
asynchronous request right here.
Actually, we can bring over
the whole script blog.
What am I talking about?
Bring over the whole thing,
which is great.
And then this means that this script block
is actually no longer needed on this app.
Otherwise we do need
a script block because why,
we need to import our Pokedex.
So Pokedex from components
Pokedex Dot View,
and then we can register
it on the components.
And then we have Pokedex like that.
>> We've got a case mix-up in the--
>> We have a case mix-up?
With you, I did that again.
Thank you for catching that.
This is sometimes the trouble
with the context switch.
Okay, so inside of here, we'll have
our template here for the pre-fetch.
We don't even need this anymore,
this button.
So all this is gonna do is
render that as a pre block and
mean we can take this here and
then we get the Pokedex like this okay.
So let's take a look and see if this
worked out the way we wanted it to, okay.
So, first thing first, we'll see that when
we're taking a look at this right now,
it's still yelling at us, but
we actually are seeing something
rendered unlike before.
And it's because in this particular case,
it's true we still need to actually
suspense Component at this point.
And so like I said, we're just going
to cover a high level uses of it.
We're not going to dive deep
into suspense as a component.
Because again, if we think about it from a
view perspective is that view, is saying,
I don't know what to do with this yet.
So please give me some sort of fallback so
that in case this thing completely
crashes, we don't have this hanging
component that's not going to do anything.
So we bring in our suspense component.
And we say, Okay,
this is what I want you to render.
But in case things don't work,
here's the fallback
where we say loading Pokedex data,
just like that.
Suspense, suspense,
suspense ,bom bom.
Yes, I already know that, okay.
So why?
Let's restart the server real quick,
just to make sure that's not
anything weird getting botched.
>> You don't have to import suspense?
>> No import,
It's kind of like the global component.
It's just a global component
that's registered.
Now What's weird?
I forgot, yeah.
Okay, so inside of here you're thinking
I did the suspense right, right?
I did it inside of my component
because I gave it a fallback.
But this approach doesn't work because
if we think about it another way,
it's happening at the child level.
And if we look at the error messages
again, it actually says that the suspense
boundary needs to be
found at the parent tree.
Because if you think about it another way,
remember how we used to do the VF?
This is the same kinda concept where you
want the VF actually happening at the top
for something like suspense,
because it knows what to handle.
So, if I go ahead and delete this
stuff again,this time we can actually
say we'll have a suspense component here.
That will then render out the Pokedex
component when it's ready otherwise
fallback to this text that's
actually what's happening here.
And once we do that,
now everything is working as expected.
So again the API for
suspense is experimental but
this mental model now of having
the ability to suspend your component and
then have it switch out with some sort of
fallback is something that is going to be
more popular with frameworks,
not just view.
And so something that I wanted you all
to keep in mind when it came to that.